textboxes – artist statement
Charly Yan Miller

A blank webpage fills the player’s view. In the center: a textbox contains the words “shout into the void”. The player can decide to move around this space if they choose using the mouse to click where they want to travel or the arrows keys to inch left, right, up or down. Without any other text in the scene, however, there is nothing to measure the textbox’s movement against and experientially the act is rendered meaningless.

If the player hits ‘enter’ any text contained in the input element is stamped into the scene and their avatar is pushed downwards a line. Through the keyboard movement is quantized by lines and characters, but via the mouse the player can click anywhere on the screen, enabling a more thoughtful and aesthetic approach to the positioning of text in space. Texts are anonymous— so unless the initial transition from text contained within an avatar to text stamped into the scene is witnessed, all characters and utterances within the scene are divorced from their authors.

If a new player enters the scene they are no longer confronted with a empty space but rather by all the texts created by the other players who share the space. In this way a player joining an existing server will be given a glimpse into the history of the scene via these recorded texts, not all actions are recorded however and therefore this recorded history is simply a hint at the past. As the session grows older these texts will increasingly overlap and space becomes congested. Some players will find richness in this density and stay near the spawn area while others will venture to the peripheries of scene, perhaps out into the distance where once again white envelops their avatar and movement is rendered meaningless.
Avatars contain no essential aesthetic differences and therefore any identities which arise in the game are constructed within that session due to associations between avatars and texts. Players might decide to more actively identify themselves by moving throughout the space carrying a given name in their text input, or by periodically stamping a short and spam-able sequence of letters acting as breadcrumbs to their avatar.

An interesting dynamic emerges when two players attempt to hold conversation, as on the stamping of text into the scene their avatars are literally pushed downwards. Therefore, in order to not break the flow of a conversation and awkwardly reposition an avatar via the mouse each conversant must press enter roughly the same amount of times as their counterpart to avert the risk of one member outrunning the other. This means that successful conversations tend to feature a frequency of back and fourth responses, and this also leads to conversations becoming spatially dynamic activities as avatars are naturally propelled downwards through space.

textboxes models an absurd world which refuses to present the player with any goals or larger purpose. It is only when the attention is shifted away from the vast disorienting sea of white of the initial webpage and towards player-created (cultural) texts that avatars become anchored in space and time and narratives can be constructed. Any meaning or purpose generated within textboxes is provided not by any content to be found in the initial request of the static html and JavaScript, but arises in the interactions and relationships created in-between texts, be it the literal static text or the avatars.
